<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->



psiplot
=======

psiplot is an R package for generating plots of percent spliced-in (PSI) values of alternatively-spliced exons that were computed by [VAST-TOOLS](https://github.com/vastgroup/vast-tools), an RNA-Seq pipeline for alternative splicing analysis. The functions are derived from the `vast-tools plot` tool.

Currently, the plot code for VAST-TOOLS and psiplot are maintained separately, even though they are technically identical. Future work is planned to integrate psiplot into the vast-tools `plot` code.

Installation
------------

See [Releases](https://github.com/kcha/psiplot/releases) for the latest release or get the most up-to-date development version via devtools:

``` {.r}
install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("kcha/psiplot")
```

Usage
-----

### Input

psiplot takes as input the PSI and/or cRPKM results generated by VAST-TOOLS (e.g. after running `vast-tools combine` or `vast-tools diff`). This README uses the provided sample datasets, `psi` and `crpkm`, as example input data.

### Plotting

The function `plot_event()` generates a plot of a single event:

``` {.r}
library(psiplot)

# Plot an event using provided sample dataset
plot_event(psi[1,])

# Alternatively, to plot an event by gene name (for example, TSPAN6):
plot_event(psi[psi$GENE == "TSPAN6",])
```

In addition, cRPKM expression values generated by VAST-TOOLS can also be plotted in a similar manner using the function `plot_expr()`:

``` {.r}
# Using sample dataset
plot_expr(crpkm[1,])

# Alternatively
plot_expr(crpkm[crpkm$NAME == "TSPAN6",])
```

### Customizing plots

There are two ways to customize the plots: using a configuration file or using R arguments.

#### The `.config` file way

In `vast-tools plot`, an optional config file can be used to customize the plots' visual appearance. The same config file can be supplied here as well.

``` {.r}
plot_event(psi[1,], config="/path/to/config")

# config can also be pre-loaded into a data frame
cfg <- read.table("/path/to/config", header=T, sep="\t", stringsAsFactor=FALSE)
plot_event(psi[1,], config=cfg)
```

The color and ordering of samples can be customized by supplying a plot configuration file. This file is tab-delimited and must be manually created. For example:

``` {.r}
# sample config data
config
#>   Order SampleName GroupName RColorCode
#> 1     1    Sample4    Neural    #ff0000
#> 2     2    Sample3    Neural        red
#> 3     3    Sample2    Muscle       blue
#> 4     4    Sample1    Muscle    #0000ff
```

-   **Order**: The ordering of the samples from left to right.
-   **SampleName**: Name of the sample. MUST match sample name in input table.
-   **GroupName**: Group name. Use for plotting the average PSI of samples belonging to the same group (enable by setting `groupmean=TRUE`)
-   **RColorCode**: An R color specification:
    1.  color name (as specified by `colors()`)
    2.  hex color code (\#rrggbb)

Tips:

-   The samples under SampleName MUST MATCH the names in the input table. Only the samples listed in the config file will be represented in the resulting plots. Other samples in the input table but not in the config file will be ignored. This may be useful for plotting only a subset of samples.
-   The column **Order** does not need to be in sorted order. Thus, you can change the ordering of your samples by simply changing the order number.

#### The R way

The colors and other graphical parameters can also be configured in R via arguments. `plot_events()` and `plot_expr()` provides a limited set of arguments and can be used in conjunction with a config file. See `?plot_events` and `?plot_expr` for more details on the available options.

``` {.r}
plot_event(psi[1,], config = config, pch = 9, ylim = c(20, 80))
```

Issues
------

Please report all bugs and issues using the [issue tracker](https://github.com/kcha/psiplot/issues).

Related Projects
----------------

-   [VAST-TOOLS](https://github.com/vastgroup/vast-tools)
